Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is part
three of our three-part mini-series
on the theme of “Modern Egypt”.
In case you missed them, in part one,
we talked about the Egyptian Revolution,
the circumstances leading up to it,
what actually happened, and how, in many
ways, it fell short of its lofty ideals.
In part two, we talked about the New
Administrative Capital, the city Egypt
is trying to build in the desert,
and how its critics suggest that it
is about more than urban planning.
And in today’s episode, part three, we
are going to talk about the murder of
an Italian PhD student called Giulio
Regeni, a young man who lost his life
in a horrific way, almost certainly
at the hands of the Egyptian state.
Just as a little disclaimer before
we start, this episode will have
some descriptions that some listeners
might find unsettling, because the
subject matter is pretty nasty,
so please take this as a polite
warning before we get started.
And also, this episode will assume that
you’ve listened to part one, on the
Egyptian Revolution, or at least you know
quite a bit about that period, as I’ll be
referencing some key people from that era.
So, with that out of the way,
let’s get started and talk about
the murder of Giulio Regeni.
If you walk around the city of Trieste,
in north-eastern Italy, you might
be surprised at some of the banners
you see hanging from the windows.
One you see just off the main square
reads, “Free Territory of Trieste”,
with the subheader, in English, I
should add, “USA AND UK COME BACK!”
This is a nod to the unusual period
after World War II, when the city and
its surrounding area wasn’t part of
Italy; it was its own, “free state”,
administered by the Allied countries,
a little like post-war Berlin.
This poster is more of a historical
curiosity, of course; there are few
calling for an actual split with Italy
and the return of British and American
troops, but it is an important reminder of
this unusual period in the city’s history.
Another poster that you see around the
city is no mere historical curiosity.
In big black letters against a yellow
background, it reads “Verità per Giulio
Regeni” - “Truth for Giulio Regeni”,
or you might translate it as something
like “Giulio Regeni Deserves The Truth”.
Next year, it will be 10 years since this
man was last seen alive, and although some
truth has come to light, unfortunately,
justice has not been served.
So, what is known about Giulio Regeni?
He was born in Trieste, in Italy, in 1988.
He studied abroad, in Leeds and Cambridge
in the UK, and in Vienna, in Austria,
and became particularly interested in
the burgeoning political movements in
the Middle East, particularly in Egypt.
As part of his PhD at Cambridge,
he travelled to Egypt to research
trade unions, which he thought
could be a fundamental part of new
democratic movements in the country.
Trade unions were highly regulated under
Mubarak, but when his regime fell, there
was a growing feeling that workers'
rights now had the chance to improve,
and with this, there was a growth in
the number and strength of trade unions.
But, as you’ll remember from part one,
just three years after Mubarak resigned,
in 2014, Egypt got another military
dictator in the form of General Abdel
Fattah el-Sisi, or Sisi for short.
The police state was back, and Sisi
and his secret police kept a close
eye on Egypt’s growing trade unions.
This was the environment in which
Regeni found himself when he moved
to Cairo in September of 2015.
It wasn’t his first
time in Egypt, mind you.
He had spent time there as an intern
for the United Nations back in 2013,
during the military coup against Morsi,
so he was no stranger to Egyptian life.
Regeni initially focussed his research
on trade unions for street vendors.
Like in much of the Middle East, there
is a huge informal economy in Egypt,
and there are an estimated 5 to 6
million street vendors in the country.
These street vendors, who would lug their
wares to and fro every morning and try
to make enough money by the end of the
day to support their family, well, they
were clearly in a precarious position.
You’ll remember Mohamed Bouazizi
from part one, the Tunisian street
vendor who set himself on fire in
December of 2010 after being habitually
abused and extorted by the police.
As individuals, these street vendors
were powerless against Egypt’s
police state, but as a group, as a
trade union, well, they were in a
somewhat stronger bargaining position.
This was the focus of Regeni’s research.
And this wasn’t desk-based research,
him sitting at home on a laptop or
leafing through books in the library.
He was out in the streets, going
to trade union meetings, getting
to know the people involved.
It was proper, in-person field research.
Most of the people he dealt with
were, reportedly, very friendly.
Egyptians have a reputation in the
Arab world for being friendly and
welcoming, and for the most part, this
seems to have been Regeni’s experience.
He had got into a few sticky
situations, where people had
pressured him for money, but it was
nothing he hadn’t bargained for.
The research was going well, and
after five months in Cairo, he was
coming to the end of his time there.
In fact, he had already
booked a plane ticket back.
And then, at 7.41 pm on the 25th of
January–the fifth anniversary of the
2011 uprising–he sent a text to his
long-distance girlfriend, telling her
he was going out to meet some friends.
His friends waited for him.
And waited.
He never arrived.
His friends grew worried and started
calling around, but no one had seen him.
His family back in Italy got involved,
and soon the Italian embassy in Cairo was
pressing Egyptian authorities for answers.
Had he been kidnapped by Islamic
radicals, and he would appear on a grainy
video being beheaded in the desert?
Had he been robbed and
thrown into the Nile?
For eight long days, there
was nothing—just silence.
Then, on February the 3rd, a bus
driver on the Cairo-Alexandria desert
highway–about 130km away from where Regeni
was last seen–slammed on the brakes.
He got out of the truck, and in a
ditch by the side of the road, he
found Giulio Regeni’s dead body.
He was naked from the waist down,
and his body showed signs of
having been horrifically beaten.
His body bore the marks of
unimaginable cruelty: cigarette
burns, broken bones, cuts all over
his skin, and his teeth smashed in.
This was all before the blow that’s
believed to have killed him: a blow to
the back of his neck, fracturing his
spine, and putting him out of his misery.
His body was so battered that his
mother could barely recognise him;
she was only able to determine it
was him by the tip of his nose.
This wasn’t a random act of violence;
it had all the hallmarks of something
deliberate, something professional.
The discovery was just the beginning
of a mystery that only deepened.
So, what happened between that text on
the evening of January 25 and the moment
his body was found on February 3rd?
What happened in those eight days?
The Egyptian authorities had some answers,
none of them particularly convincing.
They first claimed he had
died in a traffic accident.
Hit by a car, they said.
That story fell apart fast when the
autopsy showed torture, not tyre marks.
Then they suggested it was a robbery
gone wrong or maybe a personal dispute.
Perhaps Regeni was gay, they said,
and this was a crime of passion.
He had met up with a man for sex,
perhaps even a man who was hiding
his homosexuality, and out of
shame, he had murdered Regeni.
That’s why he wasn’t wearing
any trousers,  that’s why he
was naked from the waist down.
This was ridiculous, Regeni’s
friends and family protested.
He wasn’t gay, he had a girlfriend,
and what’s more, this level
of barbarity didn’t match any
kind of “crime of passion”.
Then, the Egyptian authorities
suggested yet more possibilities.
Perhaps he was a drug addict, and
this was a drug deal gone wrong?
Few believed them.
A few weeks later the authorities
even floated the idea that
he’d been killed by a gang of
criminals who targeted foreigners.
He had been abducted, they said, tortured
for his material posessions, and when they
found out that he was a mere PhD student,
they killed him and dumped his body.
The Egyptians even had the names and
details of the gang, but, and here
is where it gets particularly fishy,
unfortunately, they had all been killed in
a police shootout a few weeks beforehand.
The Egyptian authorities knew that
this criminal gang was guilty because
the police had raided the gang’s
apartment and “ found” Regeni’s personal
belongings, including his passport.
Now, there is a lot about this
particular theory that doesn’t stack up.
Firstly, there are eyewitness accounts
of the shooting of the gang members
that suggest there was no shootout;
the police shot them, then dragged
them back into their van to make
it look like it was a shootout.
These people, whether real gang members
or not, were murdered by the police.
And it gets even more fishy.
On the date of Regeni’s disappearance, the
leader of this gang wasn’t even in Cairo,
so he couldn’t have been responsible.
And if this gang wasn’t responsible
for Regeni’s murder, how did the police
“find” his passport in their apartment?
And if his mother even had trouble
recognising her son’s body, how did
the Egyptian authorities immediately
know the dead man was Regeni?
It looked like an increasingly
messy cover-up, and all fingers
pointed at the Egyptian state.
After all, the way the young researcher
was tortured matched a pattern.
Human rights activists had long documented
how Sisi’s regime dealt with perceived
threats: activists, journalists,
anyone asking too many questions.
They would disappear into secret
detention centres, often called “black
sites,” where they’d be interrogated,
tortured, and often murdered.
And, unfortunately, this was what Regeni’s
family and the Italian authorities
immediately thought had happened to him.
After all, he would almost certainly
have been on the Egyptian police’s radar.
He wasn’t just studying trade unions
from afar; he was meeting people,
asking questions about wages,
working conditions, and how these
vendors felt about the government.
These were all things that were
very dangerous in Sisi’s Egypt.
And indeed, the Egyptian
authorities then admitted that,
yes, they were watching Regeni.
It turned out that one of the leaders
of a trade union that Regeni was
affiliated with was a police informant.
He was passing on information to
the Egyptian secret police, and
a few weeks prior to Regeni’s
disappearance, he had told them
that he thought Regeni was a spy.
And Regeni had been followed
and tracked by the secret police
for a few weeks at a minimum.
He had noticed a woman taking a
photo of him at a trade union event
a few weeks prior, and he sensed that
he might have been being followed.
The Egyptian state admitted as much
but claimed that they had only tracked
him for a few days before coming
to the conclusion that he was not
a spy; he was no-one of importance.
Back in Italy, Regeni’s family and friends
were heartbroken but determined to get
some kind of justice, some form of truth.
They teamed up with human
rights lawyers and pressured
the Italian government to act.
In Italy, “Verità per Giulio Regeni”
became a rallying cry; those yellow
banners started popping up everywhere, not
just in Trieste but across the country.
The Italian government recalled its
ambassador from Cairo in protest
and demanded a proper investigation.
They pressed for more evidence that
might help unravel the mystery, such
as CCTV footage from outside the
metro station where he was last seen.
Mysteriously, this evidence
went missing or was refused on
the grounds of data protection.
As the years ticked by, a
few things became clearer.
In 2017, Italian prosecutors started
building a case, pointing the finger
at Egypt’s National Security Agency.
They identified four Egyptian
security officers as suspects,
accusing them of kidnapping,
torturing, and murdering Regeni.
Witnesses came forward, too.
One said he’d overheard an Egyptian
policeman bragging about grabbing
“the Italian” at a metro station.
Another claimed Regeni had been
betrayed by someone close to his
research, possibly a trade union
contact pressured into informing on him.
There was even video footage of this
man trying to get money from Regeni,
which was used against Regeni to try
to put forward the idea that he was a
spy and was trying to buy information.
But Egypt wouldn’t cooperate.
Those officers were never
questioned, let alone arrested.
And they weren’t just
any security officers.
Their names were Major General Tarek
Saber and Major Sherif Magdy, who
were both high-ranking members of
Egypt’s National Security Agency.
And they named two high-ranking members
of the police force, too: Colonel
Hesham Helmy and Colonel Acer Kamal.
These were not random, rogue
officers who picked up a foreigner
and gave him a bit of a beating.
They were high-ranking officers of
the Egyptian state, and the fact that
they were being so protected suggests
that senior leaders in Egypt were
fully aware of what was going on.
And here’s where it gets murkier still.
Mahmoud Sisi, the son of General
Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, the President of
Egypt, was the deputy head of one of
Egypt’s main secret police agencies.
Now, this is not to suggest that Regeni
was murdered on the direct orders of
Mahmoud Sisi, or his father, the Egyptian
president, but that it seems highly
likely they know exactly what happened
and may even have given the order to
protect these men and bury the truth.
Still, this didn’t stop the Italian
authorities from trying to find it.
Finally, in 2021, the case went to trial.
An Italian court tried to prosecute
those four Egyptian officers in absentia,
without them appearing in court.
But the case never went anywhere.
Of course, the men accused denied
everything and didn’t attend the trial.
The Egyptian authorities said there
was insufficient evidence, they
refused to extradite the men, and they
even refused to provide their home
addresses or any way of contacting them.
What’s more, the defense claimed
there was no evidence that these men
even knew that they were on trial.
This seemed bizarre, as the case was
all over the news, the Egyptian state
could clearly have informed them if
they wanted, and the men had denied
committing the crime, but the law is the
law - there was no definitive proof that
the men knew they were being tried, so
legally the trial could not continue.
This was in 2021, and it was a bitter
blow to Regeni’s family, and for
justice, for truth for Giulio Regeni.
But there has since been some progress.
In September of 2023, Italy’s top
court ruled that the men could
stand trial, despite the lack of
cooperation from Egyptian authorities.
A trial resumed in February
last year, February of 2024, but
it too has not gone anywhere.
The defense for the men claimed
there is still no evidence that the
men know they are on trial, their
addresses or whereabouts are still
unknown, and the court didn’t even
know if the men were still alive.
According to the lawyer assigned to
defend them, “They are absolutely
untraceable”, and even if they were
convicted, they would “certainly
not serve their sentences”.
The probability of true justice
ever coming for Giulio Regeni
is, unfortunately, minimal.
And despite the banners that hang from
windows in Trieste, and all over Italy for
that matter, normal diplomatic relations
between Italy and Egypt have resumed.
Egypt has become the biggest buyer
of Italian weapons, with a billion
Euros of weapons being sold by Italian
companies to the Egyptian state.
Just a few kilometres to the west of
Trieste, and in fact very close to the
village where Regeni grew up, is a small
town called Monfalcone, which is the home
of the shipbuilding company, Fincantieri.
If you go to the Fincantieri website,
you can find press releases proudly
boasting of multimillion-dollar contracts
providing ships to the Egyptian navy,
selling weapons to the military that
almost certainly murdered a young man
who grew up just a few kilometres away.
It is a cruel irony, but so long as
the banners remain, and his name is not
forgotten, there is still a slither of
possibility for justice for Giulio Regeni.
OK then, that is it for today's episode
on the state-sponsored murder of Giulio
Regeni, and with it comes the end of this
three-part mini-series on modern Egypt.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Did you know about the case
of Giulio Regeni before this?
Do you think justice will ever be served?
And what ideas do you
have for more mini-series?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.